This is Mary Lee Nolan in an interview with Mrs.
Lupe Alemán. What's
her name? Guadalupe Alemán, but Lupe, well,
Grande is Guadalupe Alemán. And for my father,
González. González. Yes. Lupe González de
Alemán. Yes, for my husband. Yes. And where were
you born? I was born here in the Nueces County. Yes.
Yes, I was born here, I was raised here. In what
year? Well, I think I was 17, it seems. And where was
your father born? My father, well, they are both
from Mexico. But I don't know where they are from.
No? No. But they invented a lot of... Nanahuato.
Nanahuato? Yes. Rial del Oro, Rial de Pozos. I
think they are neighbors like Tricorpos. Yes. And
Robstown. And that's what I heard them talking
about. Yes. And I was born...
I was the first girl, I think, in their family.
Because I grew up in a place where they worked all
day. They worked. My father, my grandparents,
they worked all those lands because it was
just a mountain. And they dug a lot with talaches
and with that they kept us, all of us, they kept
digging, digging and de-rooting. Todos mis tios,
mis abuelitos, mi papá, And my brother, the one I
have there, I have a brother who lives there in the
corner. And that brother helped my father because
he was the oldest. But they were born in Mexico, the
two of them. They just came here, they were raised
here. And he was the oldest and he helped my father.
To grab the talacha, to dig very hard. He worked
very hard, my little brother and my father, to
raise the others. Well, and then that I know from
those times that I grew up, that I was knowing, I
still recognized all that. I
went to where my father worked. I looked at them as
they worked very hard. And then I looked at many
fields and many people. their clothes hanging on
the branches, their, this, grinding, making
tortillas, some big firewood, there they put a
comal like this, they were throwing tortillas,
tortillas, and making their food, well. I met a lot
of friends like that. So, I would look at what my
grandpa was doing. What is grandpa doing? He would
say, I am making, they were called, those were
called galemes. Galemes? Galemes, from pure
land. From pure land, they made from firewood,
from the inside, from pure firewood. And then,
They would put them like this. Then they would put
grass on the firewood. Then they would put a lot of
dirt on top of everything. They would cover it with
dirt. That whole pile of dirt. But the firewood
would stay inside. And then there would be a hole in
the firewood. And they would put a lot of firewood
in there. And a lot of garbage so that a lot of
firewood would be made. That would burn. It would
burn. After it burned, I think it lasted, I don't
know much, but it seemed to last three days or a week
to cook. It was coal, like the one they make now.
Well, then, after it was ready, he was paying,
paying, and he was getting smaller and smaller.
So, with a rake, they were doing it. And they did it,
and they did it, and they dug around it, and they
were stretching it with that rake when it was
already turned off. So, here they had it very
clean, and they were making all that coal like
this, it had already been done, they did it like
this, like this, all around they dug it with that
rake. That coal, there were many ribbons, you know
what ribbons are. Well, then they threw all that
coal, they picked it like a potato. They picked
that coal, they ribbons, the ribbons like that.
They carried 30, 40 ribbons of that, of pure coal.
The town was very small, the town was very small.
What was this town called? This little town? Yes.
Well, from what I know, I don't know, but I never
knew, since I knew what it was called, it was
Corpos, because they took it to Corpos, when there
were very few shops. My grandpa took it to a huayín
and there were no mules, because those, I think,
cost more. He had some burritos, sí, sí, y él
llevaba todos esos costalitos en eso y los llevaba
a corpos. Entonces mi abuelito no quería, mi
abuelito no quería hablar, él le daba vergüenza,
pero mi abuelita sí iba con él. Mi abuelita era una
señora muy delgadita, She was a very pretty lady,
but she was dark-skinned. But she had a very pretty
body. She would go out on the street and say, Do you
buy coal? Yes, the ladies would come out. Good
morning. Good morning. This is my mother. Nice to
meet you. Oh, here. Here, here. And then she tells
me, well... So, when she talked about all that, the
ladies and gentlemen would go out to buy my
grandparents. I don't know if at that time it would
cost about 15 cents, I think a dime. They were very
happy. So with that, they bought everything they
needed for food. They bought everything they
needed from the food, they came very delighted to
the house because they brought a lot of food, of
what they wanted with that. Well, they followed
them around, around with that. Well, following
until they finished that, but they always
continued to dig, to dig, because they were paid
money for that. An acre, half an acre, they paid for
it. A fourth, an eighth, they said, that's what
they paid for, what they did. A little, but they
paid for it. Well, then, that was over and Desenray
continued.
My father, then, he gathered money, he gathered
money. That was what my grandfather, my father,
did. They gathered money, so I think they met with
the first boss that I knew, that I thought, that I
thought that my father had that boss. It was Mr.
Yondón. Yondón. Yondón. Yondón. Uh-huh. His name
was Juan Yondón. Yes. Yes. By the way, they live
around the 9th before they reach Corpus. They
don't exist anymore, but I think one or two of his
daughters do exist. Yes. His place is still there,
because it was a very beautiful place. I remember
he was a fat man. very pink, with a white beard, and
he wore a big hat, and he was a very respectful man.
But he was a man, like his family, who was also very
kind to Mexicans, because he wasn't Mexican. But
he was very kind to everyone. Where was he from?
What part? Well, I didn't know what part he was from
because when I thought about it, it was that he
lived there, he had all his property. I think, who
knows, he was the first founder of here because he
had a very beautiful house. It was worth a lot of
money because the house still exists. Well,
my father worked with him for many years. Then my
father worked with a man, his name was Jose Han. He
was another boss of my father. That boss was a very
good boss with my father. At that time, my father
was no longer working at St. Ray's. That was pure
land.
They helped my father. So they helped my father
because we were already a lot, because we were 12 in
the family. 12? 12 in the family. 12 children? Yes,
12. This is your mother, correct? Yes, she is my
mother. Your mother is Mrs. Juanita Gonzalez?
Yes. Correct. And you had 12 children? Yes, you
know it was in 19. I almost had an abortion, but in
12. God gave me so many families. Maybe it's
possible for your mother to tell me something
about Mexico. Well, yes. Where were you born?
Well, I wasn't born in Rosario, because before
they didn't tell their parents anything. I didn't
want anyone to talk to Recio because it would upset
him. I didn't know
where I was born. No? I didn't know. But you were
born in Mexico. Yes, I'm from Mexico. In Mexico.
Where in Mexico? I'm from Mexico, in Guanajuato.
Guanajuato? Yes. In what town or ranch? Well, I
almost grew up in a ranch. A ranch? A pure ranch,
yes. What's the name of this ranch? Well, the ranch
where my father used to work, well, sometimes
there was no work here in the mines, and we would go
to the ranch, because we created a mineral in the
Real de Pozo. Oh, yes. Yes. We grew up there, and
when my father stopped working, he would take us to
the ranch. We had already worked for two or three
weeks, and we came back from Vuelta a Rodar. It's a
well. It's a well where they make the money from the
mines. It's on the side of San Luis Potosí. It's on
the side of San Luis Potosí. Yes, it's very close to
San Luis Potosí. And your father was working with
mines and also with the fields? Yes, also with the
fields, yes. When he was tired of working with the
mines,
we would go to the fields to work. One month, one
week. And in what year were you born, more or less?
Well, how old were you? More or less. When we were
going there, my dad took me. You? What was your age?
No, mom doesn't know right now, nor do I know. You
were 90 years old. More or less.
And when did your family come to Texas? Oh, when we
came to give here, my little boys came every half
year. Before 1910
or after?
Well, for what reason did you come to Texas?
Because you know that for Mexico there are a lot of
needs. Yes. A lot of work, it's very cheap. Yes. And
here, since our families were here, they fixed it
and they took us. Yes. Yes, that's why we came here.
Yes. And was there a war in Mexico these days? We
didn't know about that war, we were already here.
Wasn't there a war in Mexico? That war that was in
Mexico, we were already here when we knew about
that war. They were here when they were already
here. They were already here when they were
already here. They were very sad this war. Yes,
very sad. They were talking about how sad it was. We
were already here. Yes, I was very young. Did you
have a family here before you came?
No. Is there a family here in Texas? This was the
first one. Ah, yes, the first girl. La primera
tejana de la familia. Sí. De la familia. Bueno. Sí.
Tu historia. Continuar.
Bueno, este, no sé ni dónde iba.
I went with the man who was
my father's boss. Yes. Well, after that, those men
helped my father a lot. And they started to give him
work. And my brothers, we all started to grow. So
they, I don't know, they gave him... about two,
three, I don't know, about five acres of land.
So, the boss, Mr. Jose Han, he had, he was a man who
had money, a man who had many mules, horses, quite a
lot. So, We started helping my father because we
were the three oldest. And my father, that was
everything.
Everything he
gave us. So my father, he helped him and bought
mules for my father.
He bought a mule for my dad and he bought the first
thing we worked with. So my dad bought a cow for that
man because the cow was very cheap because dad had a
family and he was a very good worker and he was a very
good dad. Entonces, él le vendió esa vaca. Esa vaca
era muy buena y daba mucha leche. Entonces, él
sembraba mucho. Mi papá, él lo ayudó con mulas. Y yo
no sé si las pagaría mi papá al contado o no sé, pero
él lo ayudó con mulas. Y mi papá, a veces que le
pasaba una mula bronca y mi papá la amansaba. Y él
trató de comprarse luego luego con su trabajo un
guayín, un tiro de mulas nuevas, porque él no le
gustaba, le gustaba que trabajaran las mulas
pronto. Y luego entonces, en ese rancho que le dio
esos cinco acres, no tenía mi papá, no había casa.
No, no había casa, nomás era el puro lugar. Do you
know what the house was like? It was a very big tree,
a very beautiful tree. It was very big, like this,
that tree that grew there in the corner of Salabor.
So my father, I don't know, he bought sheets, what
do you call it? Sheet. Do you know what a sheet is?
Well, so he bought it. So my father built a house.
The kitchen was big, he made the house like that.
So, I remember, we all went, we all took, we all went
to that place, but there was no house. But as it
were, there was this tree. And
then, well, my father was very good, but Entonces,
mi papá, yo agarré una cobija. ¿Ves? Yo no estaba
muy grande, pero... I grabbed a blanket and I tied
it on the floor. My father didn't like that I tied
that blanket on the floor. He grabbed one of those
sticks that hit the mules. I tried to run so they
wouldn't hit me because I was sitting on the
blanket, but he didn't like that. He said to my
father, I'm going to run, and my father did this and
I fell. Well, then when I fell down, he told me, you
shouldn't have run, he said. Well, I was going to
tell you not to throw that mattress on the ground.
It was all I remember that my father was going to hit
me. Because my father never cursed us, nor did he
ever do us wrong for him. He built that house, and
then we would step on it. We would step on the
cotton, corn, whatever it was. And he would plant a
lot of garden all
the time. So he would make us work. There was a lot of
harvest, a lot of cotton, because the water would
come and the cotton would grow a lot. So he would
say, They would grab the plow and we would work
here. They would grab the plow, all of us. There was
a lot of grass. He would help us and guide us and give
us encouragement and everything. Well, I grew up
with cotton. My father used to sell cotton bags. I
don't know if that man was the fourth, or the
middle, or I don't know how he did with his boss. But
then, my father always bought the best. With what
God gave him, he bought skulls, all kinds of tools
that he needed to work, he would buy them. He
thought about all that because he looked and
because his boss told him.
And he always thought about having them for us.
Well, then... The owner had a lot of food for the
cows because he had a dairy farm. He had silos that
were very big and they fed them there. So you would
see a lot of guayines all loaded with pasture. And
that pasture was carried by the Guayines. They
were paid for that pasture, because they carried
all that pasture to the machine. He had a machine
that you put the manhojo there, they were pure
manhojos. They cut it in the work and then they put
it in the barn. You see, they were in the barn. He put
workers to make the barn, like the Indians, that's
how they did it. Well, then, here were some
loaders, the guayines arrived, like trunks, and
they threw those loaders, they threw the pasture,
the guayines, and they put them so high, so high,
that's how they carried the guayines, all out of
order, to the silos, to the machine. Then, there,
the guayine was like this, throwing all that
manure there, and the machine was stirring it, and
throwing it into that boat. I think my father was
paid, I'm not very sure because he didn't tell us,
but I think he was paid like 5 or 10 pesos a day on each
trip. On each trip he was paid. So he was earning his
money and it was less for him. They ran the guayines
in a row, like trunks. The first one to arrive would
be the one to be loaded first, and the other one
would make more trips. Well, then my father with
that guayín maintained the house much better. But
between the family and my mother, she... and she
would tell my father to buy what he needed all the
time. She didn't want good clothes, she didn't
want anything good, like now. She wanted my father
to have what he needed to work. That's what she said
too. So, he, my father, for a long time, he changed
from there. And then she gave it to me because I
think time was over. So my grandparents, they were
always with my father, who are her parents. Yes,
they were always with my father. So we went
somewhere else, always to Don Juan Yondon's
ranch. And it was a house. So it was a house. So it was
a house that they called the house of three waters.
Because it had three corridors. One like this,
another like this, another like this, and another
like this. And it was a round house. Ah, how
beautiful. Yes, there were many rooms. Well, the
house was very big and everything, but there was no
opportunity to make it nice inside. One put what
one could and what one had. It had many windows and
everything. Well, there we spent the time,
another more time, that all my friends still have
Las amigas de los meras amigas de mi papá, de mi
mamá. Ya quedaron nomás los hijos de ellos.
Entonces, este, se vino el chubasco. Yo no sé en qué
año fue ese chubasco muy grande que acabó Corpus.
Ah, 1919. Ajá. 1919.
Yes, ma'am. yes yes well then I think I would have
like some ten years I think what happened during
this chubasco is chubasco the same thing as a
hurricane Well, I think so, like Celia, almost
like that. Because look, we were in that house,
that house was very strong. Well, there were my
grandparents, there was a brother of mine who is
the eldest in the family, my brother was 30 years
old. He didn't get married until he was 30 years
old. He got married after I got married. Yes. Well,
then, there was all that Gallardo family. They
came to the strength of the Higronazo because the
house of God was like this. The water was given to
him like this. That family was given to him like
this. Because of his... Because of the water. Yes,
his body. His body. The water rose up to here. In the
middle of his body. Yes, the water. And they went,
they were all tied together and held in their
hands, and the air in their strength and the water,
and they left with us, all that family. So, there
were my grandparents, there was that family, they
were two, it was a son and his... and his father,
men, my father and my three brothers
and my father and my three brothers, well, and
those were five. So they went inside quickly
because the air didn't let them in. So the air came
like this, right? It lifted the door, it sold it
hard. So they all grabbed a machete and they all ran
to the side of the door. There was a time when they
locked her up. There were five of them. They locked
her up, tied her up with a rope, and then they put
something strong on her. So the house was like
this, but the house never fell. And since they put
pressure on her, that's where the hurricane came
in, but it didn't come in. Well, everything calmed
down. Everything calmed down and the water
stayed. So many people came from other places
because they wanted help to help raise the river.
Because it was destroyed. They looked at us. Do you
know where the river is? That river over there, the
9th? Yes. Well, that river... Había muchos
árboles y todo. No se miraban árboles. Todo se
miraba así, pero mirabas tú como un pueblo porque
todo de otras partes se trajo a la agua. Sí. Todo.
Había... Había cosas de aranzas, de tab, había de
corpos, había de pueblos vecinos. Todo había en
ese río. Todo había allí. Una negrita la sacaron de
un tanque de aceite. Una señora la hallaron
colgada en uno de los árboles. Oh, my dad went to
help. My dad and that Gallardo family, the two of
them went to help. My brothers went to help because
the boss told my dad, come on, help, he said,
because they need help to lift up the debris that
there was from the chubasco. And all the neighbors
from there left. They came from many places to help
there. But you looked at it as if it had been a town.
You looked at how many things there were there. So
the police were taking care of it because there
were many things of value thrown away. And then
they checked them all, those who were going to help
them checked them. They didn't bring anything.
But I'm not saying that I'm in favor of my parents or
anything. But my parents taught us to respect
others. And they respected me because I never told
them to bring anything to the house. From what was
there, no. I never saw anything. I never knew
anything because they never brought anything.
Well, then, after a short time, all of that, for a
long time, they kept raising all of that. After a
short time, we left from there. We all left for that
ranch that still exists, but the owners don't.
Here it is, it was Jose Yaliva. After that, from
that ranch, We went to... what is the 9th street?
It's the 9th street and we were there. Do you know
where the 9th street is? 37, number 37. Hey
Virginia, is the 9th street, what number is it?
It's the 9th street. That's how we named it. That's
how we named it. That's how we named it. That's how
we named it. That's how we named it. That's how we
named it. Yes, but she was Italian. Yes, she was
Italian. Her wife was Mexican. She was a very
beautiful lady. And they were very nice. So they
had a house because they were the first founders of
Corpus. So my father and they went to that place
because that man told him, Gonzales, I don't know
how they would fix it, but he said he would pass his
land to him so he could plant it. Like my father, he
already had everything, so he said, well, but I
don't have a house, he said, but I have a little
house, and that little house only had a room, as
long as here, and the kitchen was divided, and it
was small. He said, there you go, he said, in the
meantime, he said, but it's very good land, and
it's enough. So he said, my dad, it's good. And so we
went to that place. So it was on the other side of
that place, there was another land, and it was from
another Italian. Yes. Yes, they were... The only
friends of the other Italians were friends. So
they had a very nice house because those families
were the first ones. They had a two-story house
that still exists. It was a two-story house, so my
father was very close to them. They were very close
since my father came here and met all of that
family.
They had their parents from those Italians. They
were very young, both of them. My father and mother
were this size. Both of them were old. But they
didn't know any Spanish, but they were always
good. And my father had a very good friendship with
them. When my father needed something, He would go
with him. When my father needed to borrow money,
the man, that cigarette, would lend money to my
father until the year was over. When the year was
over, with what my father raised, he would pay 200,
300 pesos to that man, with what my father raised,
to live with us. Bueno, entonces cuando él tenía
trabajo, mi papá, He was going to work with him.
When he didn't have money, he was going to work with
him. He helped him a lot. My father really liked to
play in the barrage. They really liked to play in
the barrage, the Italians. They looked for my
father. My father, the day he didn't work, he was up
until one in the morning, at four, with them,
playing in the barrage. They had a very good time
with them. He was... They were two brothers, they
were Italians. They loved my father very much.
Well, then, they helped us all the time. If he said,
Hey, Fernando, are you going? Because my father's
name was Fernando. So he said, I want you to lend me a
boy so that I can roll the cotton or whatever. So my
father says, well, you know, the boys are busy
here, but if you want, my girl is going to help you.
Oh, that's good, Fernando. We make the roll and all
that. Well, I was going to roll the work that they
wanted, I was going to do it. Well, then he had two
girls, that man had, his name was Juan, the other
one was called Rocky and the other one was called
Juan. So my father treated the older one, who was
Juan. Well, then he says he had, Three
girls. And those girls, they were average, those
girls. Only one of them was the oldest. So, they
grew up, well, not much, but they were always big,
the oldest. Because they didn't let me, like now,
they didn't let me play a lot. They only gave me a
certain amount of time to play with my friends.
That was one friend. My cousin was another friend
because my aunt lived next door to those Italians.
Y mi prima, pues casi era de la camada mía, pues
tendría yo creo como algunos once o doce años,
nosotros las tres. At that time, the girl was
Italian. She had long hair and a beautiful family
braid. I went to my mother and asked her, Lupita,
will your mother let you come to my house? I said, I
don't think so, because I'm working. She said, I'm
going to tell your mom. And she came early. And she
said, Mrs. Juanita, let Lupita go play with me for a
little while. And Trinda, my cousin, said, well,
she said, mom, well, go. She said, but just for a
little while, Lupe. Half an hour. or Asina. We used
to go and play together. I used to play with the
other cousin for a little while, either at her
house or at my house. For a little while, and then
we'd go home. Lupita would say, well, I'm leaving.
I'd go home soon. But it wasn't all the time. It was
only once a week. Or on Sundays, I'd do everything I
could, and I'd have it on Sundays, but it was at my
house, and my friends would go there. to play with
me, because I really liked the ball game. And I
still like the ball
game. And then, well, she begged a lot, that year
that we were there, she begged a lot, my little
friend, my mom and my dad, because my dad was in
charge. Entonces dice, ¿por qué no la dejan ir a
Lupita que vaya a la escuela? Yo nunca he ido a la
escuela. Nunca. Why not? Because the schools were
retired. They weren't very retired, but the
parents were always stricter. In short, the
parents in those years didn't know what one could
be missing. Not even one could think of that.
Entonces, de allí estaba retirado, no estaba muy
retirado, pero podíamos ir a pie como íbamos
entonces, porque cuando esa amiguita me animó y a
mi papá que me dejara ir, que me dejara ir a la
escuela, entonces me dijo, pues está bueno que
vaya a la escuela, dijo mi papá y mi mamá, pues que
vaya a la escuela. Pues que entonces ella estaba
bien contenta porque allí no había amiguitas para
que fueran de allí de ese barrio para que fueran con
ella, nomás yo, mi prima y mi primo. So, we went to
the school. That school was made by Mr. Jose Jante.
They told him. He was my father's boss. He made that
school, which is on the way down. I don't know if it
will be closed. On the way down, there is a school on
the same road. So we went to school and she had a lot
of white friends, but she didn't leave us. She
always ran and talked with us. Before leaving, she
would go to the street and tell me, Lupita, because
there was a mountain there, a little bit of a
mountain, and she had my flip-flops, and I would
get together with my cousin, and there weren't
many Mexicans, so she would say, Lupita, No te
vayas a ir y me dejes sola. Dice, Lupe, yo te doy un
sándwich. Dice, pa' que me esperes, me decía. Le
decía yo, pues dile a mi prima. Le decía, si ella me
espera a mí, entonces yo te espero a ti. No necesito
sándwich. Entonces decía, ay, Lupita, por favor,
dice, espérame. So I said, well, and I said to my
cousin, let's go, let's go, because she doesn't
come with us when we're here, she doesn't come with
us, she says, it's better to go. Oh no, I said to her,
let's wait, poor thing, let's wait. Well, well,
I'm not going to go, I'm going to wait for her. Well,
then we were waiting for her. And she did go with us.
So when we were going, she was sharing sandwiches
with us and my cousin always Well, she didn't like
it. So she said, she said, oh, yes, she said, oh,
don't lick me so much that I don't have a ranch. She
said, she said, my cousin, oh, cousin, why are you
so bad? I said, well, playing like that, well,
then. Ay, pues que mi primer maestra que ya murió,
fue primera y última maestra que yo tuve, fue Miss
Bessie. Bueno, esa maestra fue una maestra que
vino de otros estados, esa maestra.